# Internationalization (i18n)

This file explains how to provide translations for CodeDefenders.  
These steps are not required to run CodeDefenders, as it will default to English.
If you want to use the translations provided in the repo (but do not need to add or change them),
it is sufficient to do steps 1.1 and 2.3.

## 1. Which Prerequisites and Steps Do I Need?

- If you want to deploy CodeDefenders and the application is only needed in English, this file and the whole
  internationalization can be ignored.
- If you want to deploy the translations already provided in this repo, but do not want to add additional languages or
  edit the current translations,
  you only need to do step 3.3 (which requires prerequisite 2.1).
- If you are a developer, and you want to change translations or strings displayed to the user, you need to do all the
  steps
  every time you change strings.

## 2 Prerequisites

### 2.1 GNU gettext

We use [gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html) for internationalization.
You need to download and install the latest gettext version, for example from:  
https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/gettext  
_tested with 0.23.1 (from 2025-05-29)_

### 2.2 xgettext-regex

As gettext does not offer support for JSP files, we use a regex-based xgettext
tool ([npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tim-greller/xgettext-regex)).
It is listed as devDependency in the package.json and therefore automatically installed and usable by
executing `./node_modules/@tim-greller/xgettext-regex/bin/xgettext-regex.js`.

You can also install it globally and make it available in the terminal easily by running

```shell
npm install @tim-greller/xgettext-regex --global
```

## 3 Providing Translations

### 3.1 Create POT files

The keys.pot file is created by extracting all strings that should be translated from the source files using
xgettext-regex.

```shell
./i18n.sh extract
```

### 3.2 PoEdit ─ Create PO files

Using [PoEdit](https://poedit.net/), you can conveniently translate all the translations gathered in keys.pot.  
For every language, a new .po file will be created. To add new translations to a .po file, open it in PoEdit and select
`Translation > Update from POT file...` in the menu to add all new keys from the keys.pot.

Alternatively to PoEdit, you can also use similar software or simply a text editor.

### 3.3 Create the resource bundle

The last step is to compile the translations into a Messages_language.class resource bundle class file for each
language.
We can do that using the `msgfmt` tool that comes with GNU gettext and our .po files containing the translations.

```shell
./i18n.sh compile
```

This shell script command is equal to running
`msgfmt --java2 -d target/classes -r org.codedefenders.i18n.Messages -l de po/de.po`
for every PO file.

This step is done automatically when building the project with Maven.

_______
_more information:_  
https://xnap-commons.sourceforge.net/gettext-commons/tutorial.html#Creating_Resource_Bundles
